Comparing type inference in readr and arrow (#1)
thisisnic/blog_drafts_for_review: type-inference-in-readr-and-arrow.rmd

# Type inference in readr and arrow

The CSV format is widely used in data science, and at its best works
well as a simple human-readable format that is widely known and
understood. The simplicity of CSVs though, as a basic text format also
has its drawbacks.  One is that it contains no information about data
types of its columns, and if you're working with CSVs in an application
more complex than a text editor, those data types must be inferred by
whatever is reading the data.

In this blog post, I'm going to discuss how CSV type inference works in
the R packages [readr](https://readr.tidyverse.org/) and [arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/), and highlight the differences between
the two.

<p align="center">
![](images/readr_hex.png){width=200px}
![](images/arrow-logo_hex_black-txt_white-bg.png){width=200px}
</p>

```{r, include=FALSE}
library(magrittr)
library(arrow)
library(readr)
```

## How does type inference work in readr?

In readr, the first step is reading in a subset of the data (by default,
1000 rows, though this can be customised). The type inference is done by

> a C++ function in readr called `collectorGuess()` which guesses types in

Reviewer: FWIW this is only true for the (legacy) first edition of readr. This is one of the awkward aspects of readr 2e switching to vroom as the backend. Because all of readr's column parsing machinery is _not_ actually used any more, unless you use it directly or you intentionally ask for edition 1.

the following order:

-   Does the column contain 0 rows? If yes, return "character"

-   Are all values missing? If yes, return "logical"

-   Tries to parse column to each of these formats and returns the first
    one it successfully parses:

    -   Logical

    -   Integer (though the default is to not look for these)

    -   Double

>     -   Number (a special type which can remove characters from strings

Reviewer: Nitpicky: I try to avoid explicitly talking about "Number" as a *type* that's distinct from integer or double. `col_number()` will return double. The special-ness of `col_number()` is in the parsing/guessing strategy, not the return value.

Author: Not nitpicky at all, it's a fair comment! Updated now.

        representing numbers and then convert them to doubles)

    -   Time

    -   Date

    -   Datetime

    -   Character

The ordering above in the parsing bullet point goes from most to least
strict in terms of the conditions which have to be met to successfully
parse an input as that data type. For example, for a column to be of

> logical type, it can only contain `TRUE`, `FALSE`, or `NA` values, which

Reviewer: It's a bit more general than this:

https://github.com/tidyverse/vroom/blob/bfbeba781fe26a4f317816f6de05df1daf8c4eae/src/vroom_lgl.h#L8-L11

is why this is the most strict type, but all of the other types could be
read in as character data, which is the least strict and why this is
last in the order.

## How does type inference work in arrow?

In arrow, `read_csv_arrow()` handles CSV reading, and much of its
interface has been designed to closely follow the excellent APIs of
`readr::read_csv()` and `vroom::vroom()`. The intention here is that
users can use parameter names they're familiar with from the
aforementioned readers when using arrow, and get the same results. The
underlying code is pretty different though, and type inference is done

> on the whole column rather than an initial subset.

Reviewer: vroom / readr 2e does type inference on a subset, yes, but it's not the initial subset. `guess_max` rows are consulted evenly spaced throughout the `n_max` rows which will be read and the final row is always included.

In addition, Arrow has a different set of possible data types compared
to R; see [the Arrow docs](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/r/articles/arrow.html) for more
information about the mapping between R data types and Arrow types.

In [the Arrow docs](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/cpp/csv.html#data-types), we can see
that types are inferred in this order:

-   Null

-   Int64

-   Boolean

-   Date32

-   Timestamp (with seconds unit)

-   Float64

-   Dictionary<String> (if ConvertOptions::auto_dict_encode is true)

> -   Dictionary<Binary> (if ConvertOptions::auto_dict_encode is true)

Reviewer 2: The brackets are interpreted as an HTML tag and hide the contents, so this looks funny in the HTML output.

Author: Oh nice, thank you for spotting that!

-   String

-   Binary

Note that if you use `arrow::read_csv_arrow()` with parameter
`as_data_frame = TRUE` (the default), the Arrow data types are then
converted to R data types.

```{r}
simple_data <- data.frame(x = c(1, 2, 3), y = c("a", "b", "c"), z = c(1.1, 2.2, 3.3))

> write.csv(simple_data, "simple_data.csv", row.names = FALSE)

Reviewer 3: Did you think about `write_csv` here instead? I was thinking it might be a touch less confusing to just stay in readr.

Author: Good point, will do!

# columns are arrow's int64, string, and double (aka float64) types
arrow::read_csv_arrow("simple_data.csv", as_data_frame = FALSE)
```

```{r}
# columns converted to R's integer, character, and double types
arrow::read_csv_arrow("simple_data.csv", as_data_frame = TRUE)
```

## What are the main differences between readr and arrow type inference?

Although there appear to be quite a few differences between the order of type inference when comparing arrow and readr, in practice, this doesn’t have much effect.  Type inference for logical/boolean and integer values are the opposite way round, but given that the underlying data that translates into these types looks very different, they’re not going to be mixed up.  The biggest differences come from custom behaviours which are specific to readr and arrow; I’ve outlined them below.

### Guessing integers

> In the code for readr, the default setting is for numeric values to always be read in as doubles but never integers.  If you want readr to guess that a column may be an integer, you need to read it in as character data, and then call `type_convert()`.  In arrow, if data can be represented as integers but not doubles, then it will be.

Reviewer: What about `col_integer()` and `col_big_integer()` (which uses the bit64 package)? Those seem much more likely and recommended for folks to use than to read in as character and then use `type_convert()`.

``` r
library(readr)
read_csv("x\n1\n2\n3", col_types = list(col_integer()))
#> # A tibble: 3 × 1
#>       x
#>   <int>
#> 1     1
#> 2     2
#> 3     3
read_csv("x\n1\n2\n3", col_types = "i")
#> # A tibble: 3 × 1
#>       x
#>   <int>
#> 1     1
#> 2     2
#> 3     3
```

<sup>Created on 2022-11-21 with [reprex v2.0.2.9000](https://reprex.tidyverse.org)</sup>

Author: I'm hesitant to swap it out directly, as this is all about inference, but I agree that the `type_convert()` thing is weird, so have added a bit in that basically says "just specify the column type".

Reviewer: Oh, I see you are really trying to show *guessing* specifically.

Sidebar: It's a very conscious choice in vroom/readr (and it wasn't always this way!) to **not** ever guess an integer type. There were too many instances of people building a pipeline with a toy dataset and having some column discovered to be integer. Then "in production" there would be new data and more data and it turned out the column doesn't necessarily contain only integers, so it should really be double. And then that would cause trouble. Hence, integer types can be specified but are never guessed.

  type_convert(guess_integer = TRUE)

```

```{r}
# integer
arrow::read_csv_arrow("int_or_dbl.csv")
```

### 32-bit integers

Another difference between readr and arrow is the difference between how integers larger than 32 bits are read in.  Natively, R can only support 32-bit integers, though it can support 64-bit integers via the bit64 package.  If we create a CSV with one column containing the largest integer that R can natively support, and then another column containing that value plus 1, we get different behaviour when we import this data with readr and arrow.  In readr, when we enable integer guessing, the smaller value is read in as an integer, and the larger value is read in as a double.  In arrow, the use of the bit64 package means both values can be represented as integers.

```{r}
sixty_four <- data.frame(x = 2^31 - 1, y = 2^31)

readr::write_csv(sixty_four, "sixty_four.csv")

# doubles by default
readr::read_csv("sixty_four.csv")
```

```{r}
# 32 or 64 bit integer depending on value size
arrow::read_csv_arrow("sixty_four.csv")
```

```{r}
# 32 bit integer or double depending on value size

> readr::read_csv("sixty_four.csv", col_types = list(.default = col_character())) %>%

Reviewer: ``` r
library(readr)
sixty_four <- data.frame(x = 2^31 - 1, y = 2^31)
readr::read_csv(
  "sixty_four.csv",
  col_types = list(x = col_integer(), y = vroom::col_big_integer())
)
#> # A tibble: 1 × 2
#>            x          y
#>        <int>    <int64>
#> 1 2147483647 2147483648
```

<sup>Created on 2022-11-21 with [reprex v2.0.2.9000](https://reprex.tidyverse.org)</sup>

Author: Ooh, nice!

  type_convert(guess_integer = TRUE)
```

### The "number" type

> One really cool feature in readr is the "number" type.  This allows reading in of values which have been stored as character data with commas to separate the thousands as doubles.  This is not supported in arrow.

Reviewer: Repeating the nitpicky-y thing from above: I would try to reword so this foregrounds the parsing strategy (not the return type).

Author: That makes sense, done!

```{r}
number_type <- data.frame(
  x = c("1,000", "1,250")
)

write.csv(number_type, "number_type.csv", row.names = FALSE)

# double type, but read in as number initially
readr::read_csv("number_type.csv")
```

```{r}
# read in as character data in Arrow
arrow::read_csv_arrow("number_type.csv")
```

### Dictionaries/Factors

> Anyone who’s been around long enough might remember that R’s native CSV reading function `read.csv()` had a default setting of importing character columns as factors (I definitely have `read.csv(..., stringAsFactors=FALSE)` carved into a groove in some dark corner of my memory).  This default was changed in version 4.0.0, released in April 2020, reflecting the fact that in most cases users want their string data to be imported as characters unless otherwise specified.  Still, some datasets contain character data which users do want to import as factors.  In reader, this can be controlled by manually specifying the column as a factor

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Anyone who’s been around long enough might remember that R’s native CSV reading function `read.csv()` had a default setting of importing character columns as factors (I definitely have `read.csv(..., stringAsFactors=FALSE)` carved into a groove in some dark corner of my memory).  This default was changed in version 4.0.0, released in April 2020, reflecting the fact that in most cases users want their string data to be imported as characters unless otherwise specified.  Still, some datasets contain character data which users do want to import as factors.  In readr, this can be controlled by manually specifying the column as a factor
```

> In arrow, if you don’t want to individually specify column types, you can set up an option to import character columns as dictionaries (the equivalent of factors), which are converted into factors.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In arrow, if you don’t want to individually specify column types, you can set up an option to import character columns as dictionaries (the Arrow equivalent of factors), which are converted into factors.
```

```{r}
dict_type <- data.frame(
  x = c("yes", "no", "yes", "no")
)

write.csv(dict_type, "dict_type.csv", row.names = FALSE)

# character data
readr::read_csv("dict_type.csv")
```

```{r}
# factor data
readr::read_csv("dict_type.csv", col_types = list(x = col_factor()))
```

```{r}
# set up the option. there's an open ticket to make this code a bit nicer to read.
auto_dict_option <- arrow::CsvConvertOptions$create(auto_dict_encode = TRUE)
arrow::read_csv_arrow("dict_type.csv", convert_options = auto_dict_option)
```

## Using schemas for manual control of data types

Although relying on the reader itself to guess your column types can work well, what if you want more precise control?

In readr, you can use the `col_types` parameter to specify column types. You can use the same parameter in arrow to use R type specifications.

```{r}
given_types <- data.frame(x = c(1, 2, 3), y = c(4, 5, 6))

write.csv(given_types, "given_types.csv", row.names = FALSE)

readr::read_csv("given_types.csv", col_types = list(col_integer(), col_double()))
```

> You can also use this shortcode specification.

Reviewer 2: "id" might be confusing for someone who hasn't seen it, so perhaps worth a hint:

```suggestion
You can also use this shortcode specification. Here, "i" means integer and "d" means double.
```

Author: Good point!

```{r}
readr::read_csv("given_types.csv", col_types = "id")
```

In arrow you can use the shortcodes (though not the `col_*()` functions), but you must specify the column names.

We skip the first row as our data has a header row - this is the same behaviour as when we use both names and types in `readr::read_csv()` which then assumes that the header row is data if we don't skip it.

```{r}
arrow::read_csv_arrow("given_types.csv", col_names = c("x", "y"), col_types = "id", skip = 1)
```

> What if you want to use Arrow types instead of R types though? In this case, you need to use a schema.  I won’t go into detail here, but in short, schemas are lists of fields, all of which contain a field name and a data type.  You can specify a schema like this:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
What if you want to use Arrow types instead of R types though? In this case, you need to use a schema.  I won’t go into detail here, but in short, schemas are lists of fields, each of which contain a field name and a data type.  You can specify a schema like this:
```

```{r}
# this gives the same result as before - because our Arrow data has been converted to the relevant R type
arrow::read_csv_arrow("given_types.csv", schema = schema(x = int8(), y = float32()), skip = 1)
```

```{r}
# BUT, if you don't read it in as a data frame you'll see the Arrow type
arrow::read_csv_arrow("given_types.csv", schema = schema(x = int8(), y = float32()), skip = 1, as_data_frame = FALSE)
```

## Parquet

> An alternative approach though, where you can specify your schema along with your data instead of when reading the data in, is to use Parquet format.  This means that if you’re sharing your data with others, you don’t need to worry about it being read in as the wrong data types.  In a follow-up post I’ll explore the Parquet format and compare management of data types in CSVs and Parquet.

Reviewer 2: This first sentence is a little confusing:

```suggestion
An alternative approach is to use Parquet format, which stores the data types along with the data.  This means that if you’re sharing your data with others, you don’t need to worry about it being read in as the wrong data types.  In a follow-up post I’ll explore the Parquet format and compare management of data types in CSVs and Parquet.
```

Author: Much better, cheeers!
